README.md, before:

[![NuGet](https://img.shields.io/nuget/v/Ardalis.SmartEnum.svg)](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Ardalis.SmartEnum)[![NuGet](https://img.shields.io/nuget/dt/Ardalis.SmartEnum.svg)](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Ardalis.SmartEnum) 
[![Build Status](https://dev.azure.com/ardalis/SmartEnum/_apis/build/status/ardalis.SmartEnum?branchName=master)](https://dev.azure.com/ardalis/SmartEnum/_build/latest?definitionId=2&branchName=master) 
![Test Status](https://img.shields.io/azure-devops/tests/ardalis/SmartEnum/2.svg)

NuGet: [Ardalis.SmartEnum](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Ardalis.SmartEnum)

## Give a Star! :star:

If you like or are using this project please give it a star. Thanks!

# Smart Enum

An implementation of a [type-safe object-oriented alternative](https://codeblog.jonskeet.uk/2006/01/05/classenum/) to [C# enum](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/keywords/enum).

## Contributors

Thanks to [Scott Depouw](https://github.com/sdepouw) and [Antão Almada](https://github.com/aalmada) for help with this project!

# Install

The framework is provided as a set of NuGet packages.

To install the minimum requirements:

```
Install-Package Ardalis.SmartEnum
```

To install support for serialization, select the lines that apply:

```
Install-Package Ardalis.SmartEnum.AutoFixture
Install-Package Ardalis.SmartEnum.JsonNet
Install-Package Ardalis.SmartEnum.Utf8Json
Install-Package Ardalis.SmartEnum.MessagePack
Install-Package Ardalis.SmartEnum.ProtoBufNet
```

## Usage

Define your smart enum by inheriting from `SmartEnum<TEnum>` where `TEnum` is the type you're declaring. For [example](/src/SmartEnum.UnitTests/TestEnum.cs):

```csharp
using Ardalis.SmartEnum;

public sealed class TestEnum : SmartEnum<TestEnum>
{
    public static readonly TestEnum One = new TestEnum(nameof(One), 1);
    public static readonly TestEnum Two = new TestEnum(nameof(Two), 2);
    public static readonly TestEnum Three = new TestEnum(nameof(Three), 3);

    private TestEnum(string name, int value) : base(name, value)
    {
    }
}
```

The default value type is `int` but it can be set using the second generic argument `TValue`.
The string alias can also be set explicitly, where spaces are allowed.

```csharp
using Ardalis.SmartEnum;

public sealed class TestEnum : SmartEnum<TestEnum, ushort>
{
    public static readonly TestEnum One = new TestEnum("A string!", 1);
    public static readonly TestEnum Two = new TestEnum("Another string!", 2);
    public static readonly TestEnum Three = new TestEnum("Yet another string!", 3);

    private TestEnum(string name, ushort value) : base(name, value)
    {
    }
}
```

Just like regular `enum`, more than one string can be assigned to the same value but only one value can be assigned to a string:

```csharp
using Ardalis.SmartEnum;

public sealed class TestEnum : SmartEnum<TestEnum>
{
    public static readonly TestEnum One = new TestEnum(nameof(One), 1);
    public static readonly TestEnum Two = new TestEnum(nameof(Two), 2);
    public static readonly TestEnum Three = new TestEnum(nameof(Three), 3);
    public static readonly TestEnum AnotherThree = new TestEnum(nameof(AnotherThree), 3);
    // public static TestEnum Three = new TestEnum(nameof(Three), 4); -> throws exception

    private TestEnum(string name, int value) : base(name, value)
    {
    }
}
```

In this case, `TestEnum.FromValue(3)` will return the first instance found, either `TestEnum.Three` or `TestEnum.AnotherThree`. No order should be assumed.

The `Value` content is used when comparing two smart enums, while `Name` is ignored:

```csharp
TestEnum.One.Equals(TestEnum.One); // returns true
TestEnum.One.Equals(TestEnum.Three); // returns false
TestEnum.Three.Equals(TestEnum.AnotherThree); // returns true
```

Inheritance can be used to add "behavior" to a smart enum.

This example adds a `BonusSize` property, avoiding the use of the `switch` tipically used with regular enums:

```csharp
using Ardalis.SmartEnum;

public abstract class EmployeeType : SmartEnum<EmployeeType>
{
    public static readonly EmployeeType Manager = new ManagerType();
    public static readonly EmployeeType Assistant = new AssistantType();

    private EmployeeType(string name, int value) : base(name, value)
    {
    }

    public abstract decimal BonusSize { get; }

    private sealed class ManagerType : EmployeeType
    {
        public ManagerType() : base("Manager", 1) {}

        public override decimal BonusSize => 10_000m;
    }

    private sealed class AssistantType : EmployeeType
    {
        public AssistantType() : base("Assistant", 2) {}

        public override decimal BonusSize => 1_000m;
    }
}
```

This other example implements a *state machine*. The method `CanTransitionTo()` returns `true` if it's allowed to transition from current state to `next`; otherwise returns `false`.

```csharp
using Ardalis.SmartEnum;

public abstract class ReservationStatus : SmartEnum<ReservationStatus>
{
    public static readonly ReservationStatus New = new NewStatus();
    public static readonly ReservationStatus Accepted = new AcceptedStatus();
    public static readonly ReservationStatus Paid = new PaidStatus();
    public static readonly ReservationStatus Cancelled = new CancelledStatus();

    private ReservationStatus(string name, int value) : base(name, value) 
    {
    }

    public abstract bool CanTransitionTo(ReservationStatus next);

    private sealed class NewStatus: ReservationStatus
    {
        public NewStatus() : base("New", 0)
        {
        }

        public override bool CanTransitionTo(ReservationStatus next) =>
            next == ReservationStatus.Accepted || next == ReservationStatus.Cancelled;
    }

    private sealed class AcceptedStatus: ReservationStatus
    {
        public AcceptedStatus() : base("Accepted", 1)
        {
        }

        public override bool CanTransitionTo(ReservationStatus next) =>
            next == ReservationStatus.Paid || next == ReservationStatus.Cancelled;
    }

    private sealed class PaidStatus: ReservationStatus
    {
        public PaidStatus() : base("Paid", 2)
        {
        }

        public override bool CanTransitionTo(ReservationStatus next) =>
            next == ReservationStatus.Cancelled;
    }

    private sealed class CancelledStatus: ReservationStatus
    {
        public CancelledStatus() : base("Cancelled", 3)
        {
        }

        public override bool CanTransitionTo(ReservationStatus next) =>
            false;
    }
}
```

### List

You can list all of the available options using the enum's static `List` property:

```csharp
foreach (var option in TestEnum.List)
    Console.WriteLine(option.Name);
```

`List` returns an `IReadOnlyCollection` so you can use the `Count` property to efficiently get the number os available options.

```csharp
var count = TestEnum.List.Count;
```

### FromName()

Access an instance of an enum by matching a string to its `Name` property:

```csharp
var myEnum = TestEnum.FromName("One");
```

Exception `SmartEnumNotFoundException` is thrown when name is not found. Alternatively, you can use `TryFromName` that returns `false` when name is not found:

```csharp
if (TestEnum.TryFromName("One", out var myEnum))
{
    // use myEnum here
}
```

Both methods have a `ignoreCase` parameter (the default is case sensitive).

### FromValue()

Access an instance of an enum by matching its value:

```csharp
var myEnum = TestEnum.FromValue(1);
```

Exception `SmartEnumNotFoundException` is thrown when value is not found. Alternatively, you can use `TryFromValue` that returns `false` when value is not found:

```csharp
if (TestEnum.TryFromValue(1, out var myEnum))
{
    // use myEnum here
}
```

### ToString()

Display an enum using the `ToString()` override:

```csharp
Console.WriteLine(TestEnum.One); // One
```

### Switch

Given an instance of a TestEnum, switch depending on value:

```csharp
switch(testEnumVar.Name)
{
    case nameof(TestEnum.One):
        ...
        break;
    case nameof(TestEnum.Two):
        ...
        break;
    case nameof(TestEnum.Three):
        ...
        break;
    default:
        ...
        break;
}
```

Using pattern matching:

```csharp
switch(testEnumVar)
{
    case null:
        ...
        break;
    case var e when e.Equals(TestEnum.One):
        ...
        break;
    case var e when e.Equals(TestEnum.Two):
        ...
        break;
    case var e when e.Equals(TestEnum.Three):
        ...
        break;
    default:
        ...
        break;
}
```

### Persisting with EF Core 2.1 or higher

EF Core 2.1 introduced [value conversions](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/ef/core/modeling/value-conversions) which can be used to map SmartEnum types to simple database types. For example, given an entity named `Policy` with a property `PolicyStatus` that is a SmartEnum, you could use the following code to persist just the value to the database:

```csharp
protected override void OnModelCreating(ModelBuilder builder)
{
    base.OnModelCreating(builder);

    builder.Entity<Policy>()
        .Property(p => p.PolicyStatus)
        .HasConversion(
            p => p.Value,
            p => PolicyStatus.FromValue(p));
}
```

## AutoFixture support

New instance of a `SmartEnum` should not be created. Instead, references to the existing ones should always be used. [AutoFixture](https://github.com/AutoFixture/AutoFixture) by default doesn't know how to do this. The `Ardalis.SmartEnum.AutoFixture` package includes a specimen builder for `SmartEnum`. Simply add the customization to the `IFixture` builder:

```csharp
var fixture = new Fixture()
    .Customize(new SmartEnumCustomization());

var smartEnum = fixture.Create<TestEnum>();
```

## Json<span></span>.NET support

When serializing a `SmartEnum` to JSON, only one of the properties (`Value` or `Name`) should be used. [Json.NET](https://www.newtonsoft.com/json) by default doesn't know how to do this. The `Ardalis.SmartEnum.JsonNet` package includes a couple of converters to achieve this. Simply use the attribute [JsonConverterAttribute](https://www.newtonsoft.com/json/help/html/T_Newtonsoft_Json_JsonConverter.htm) to assign one of the converters to the `SmartEnum` to be de/serialized:

```csharp
public class TestClass
{
    [JsonConverter(typeof(SmartEnumNameConverter<int>))]
    public TestEnum Property { get; set; }
}
```

uses the `Name`:

```json
{
  "Property": "One"
}
```

While this:

```csharp
public class TestClass
{
    [JsonConverter(typeof(SmartEnumValueConverter<int>))]
    public TestEnum Property { get; set; }
}
```

uses the `Value`:

```json
{
  "Property": 1
}
```

## References

- [Listing Strongly Typed Enums...)](https://ardalis.com/listing-strongly-typed-enum-options-in-c)
- [Enum Alternatives in C#](https://ardalis.com/enum-alternatives-in-c)
- [Smarter Enumerations (podcast episode)](http://www.weeklydevtips.com/014)

Commit message:

Added notes for the When/Then fluent interface

README.md, after:

[![NuGet](https://img.shields.io/nuget/v/Ardalis.SmartEnum.svg)](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Ardalis.SmartEnum)[![NuGet](https://img.shields.io/nuget/dt/Ardalis.SmartEnum.svg)](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Ardalis.SmartEnum) 
[![Build Status](https://dev.azure.com/ardalis/SmartEnum/_apis/build/status/ardalis.SmartEnum?branchName=master)](https://dev.azure.com/ardalis/SmartEnum/_build/latest?definitionId=2&branchName=master) 
![Test Status](https://img.shields.io/azure-devops/tests/ardalis/SmartEnum/2.svg)

NuGet: [Ardalis.SmartEnum](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Ardalis.SmartEnum)

## Give a Star! :star:

If you like or are using this project please give it a star. Thanks!

# Smart Enum

An implementation of a [type-safe object-oriented alternative](https://codeblog.jonskeet.uk/2006/01/05/classenum/) to [C# enum](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/keywords/enum).

## Contributors

Thanks to [Scott Depouw](https://github.com/sdepouw) and [Antão Almada](https://github.com/aalmada) for help with this project!

# Install

The framework is provided as a set of NuGet packages.

To install the minimum requirements:

```
Install-Package Ardalis.SmartEnum
```

To install support for serialization, select the lines that apply:

```
Install-Package Ardalis.SmartEnum.AutoFixture
Install-Package Ardalis.SmartEnum.JsonNet
Install-Package Ardalis.SmartEnum.Utf8Json
Install-Package Ardalis.SmartEnum.MessagePack
Install-Package Ardalis.SmartEnum.ProtoBufNet
```

## Usage

Define your smart enum by inheriting from `SmartEnum<TEnum>` where `TEnum` is the type you're declaring. For [example](/src/SmartEnum.UnitTests/TestEnum.cs):

```csharp
using Ardalis.SmartEnum;

public sealed class TestEnum : SmartEnum<TestEnum>
{
    public static readonly TestEnum One = new TestEnum(nameof(One), 1);
    public static readonly TestEnum Two = new TestEnum(nameof(Two), 2);
    public static readonly TestEnum Three = new TestEnum(nameof(Three), 3);

    private TestEnum(string name, int value) : base(name, value)
    {
    }
}
```

The default value type is `int` but it can be set using the second generic argument `TValue`.
The string alias can also be set explicitly, where spaces are allowed.

```csharp
using Ardalis.SmartEnum;

public sealed class TestEnum : SmartEnum<TestEnum, ushort>
{
    public static readonly TestEnum One = new TestEnum("A string!", 1);
    public static readonly TestEnum Two = new TestEnum("Another string!", 2);
    public static readonly TestEnum Three = new TestEnum("Yet another string!", 3);

    private TestEnum(string name, ushort value) : base(name, value)
    {
    }
}
```

Just like regular `enum`, more than one string can be assigned to the same value but only one value can be assigned to a string:

```csharp
using Ardalis.SmartEnum;

public sealed class TestEnum : SmartEnum<TestEnum>
{
    public static readonly TestEnum One = new TestEnum(nameof(One), 1);
    public static readonly TestEnum Two = new TestEnum(nameof(Two), 2);
    public static readonly TestEnum Three = new TestEnum(nameof(Three), 3);
    public static readonly TestEnum AnotherThree = new TestEnum(nameof(AnotherThree), 3);
    // public static TestEnum Three = new TestEnum(nameof(Three), 4); -> throws exception

    private TestEnum(string name, int value) : base(name, value)
    {
    }
}
```

In this case, `TestEnum.FromValue(3)` will return the first instance found, either `TestEnum.Three` or `TestEnum.AnotherThree`. No order should be assumed.

The `Value` content is used when comparing two smart enums, while `Name` is ignored:

```csharp
TestEnum.One.Equals(TestEnum.One); // returns true
TestEnum.One.Equals(TestEnum.Three); // returns false
TestEnum.Three.Equals(TestEnum.AnotherThree); // returns true
```

Inheritance can be used to add "behavior" to a smart enum.

This example adds a `BonusSize` property, avoiding the use of the `switch` tipically used with regular enums:

```csharp
using Ardalis.SmartEnum;

public abstract class EmployeeType : SmartEnum<EmployeeType>
{
    public static readonly EmployeeType Manager = new ManagerType();
    public static readonly EmployeeType Assistant = new AssistantType();

    private EmployeeType(string name, int value) : base(name, value)
    {
    }

    public abstract decimal BonusSize { get; }

    private sealed class ManagerType : EmployeeType
    {
        public ManagerType() : base("Manager", 1) {}

        public override decimal BonusSize => 10_000m;
    }

    private sealed class AssistantType : EmployeeType
    {
        public AssistantType() : base("Assistant", 2) {}

        public override decimal BonusSize => 1_000m;
    }
}
```

This other example implements a *state machine*. The method `CanTransitionTo()` returns `true` if it's allowed to transition from current state to `next`; otherwise returns `false`.

```csharp
using Ardalis.SmartEnum;

public abstract class ReservationStatus : SmartEnum<ReservationStatus>
{
    public static readonly ReservationStatus New = new NewStatus();
    public static readonly ReservationStatus Accepted = new AcceptedStatus();
    public static readonly ReservationStatus Paid = new PaidStatus();
    public static readonly ReservationStatus Cancelled = new CancelledStatus();

    private ReservationStatus(string name, int value) : base(name, value) 
    {
    }

    public abstract bool CanTransitionTo(ReservationStatus next);

    private sealed class NewStatus: ReservationStatus
    {
        public NewStatus() : base("New", 0)
        {
        }

        public override bool CanTransitionTo(ReservationStatus next) =>
            next == ReservationStatus.Accepted || next == ReservationStatus.Cancelled;
    }

    private sealed class AcceptedStatus: ReservationStatus
    {
        public AcceptedStatus() : base("Accepted", 1)
        {
        }

        public override bool CanTransitionTo(ReservationStatus next) =>
            next == ReservationStatus.Paid || next == ReservationStatus.Cancelled;
    }

    private sealed class PaidStatus: ReservationStatus
    {
        public PaidStatus() : base("Paid", 2)
        {
        }

        public override bool CanTransitionTo(ReservationStatus next) =>
            next == ReservationStatus.Cancelled;
    }

    private sealed class CancelledStatus: ReservationStatus
    {
        public CancelledStatus() : base("Cancelled", 3)
        {
        }

        public override bool CanTransitionTo(ReservationStatus next) =>
            false;
    }
}
```

### List

You can list all of the available options using the enum's static `List` property:

```csharp
foreach (var option in TestEnum.List)
    Console.WriteLine(option.Name);
```

`List` returns an `IReadOnlyCollection` so you can use the `Count` property to efficiently get the number os available options.

```csharp
var count = TestEnum.List.Count;
```

### FromName()

Access an instance of an enum by matching a string to its `Name` property:

```csharp
var myEnum = TestEnum.FromName("One");
```

Exception `SmartEnumNotFoundException` is thrown when name is not found. Alternatively, you can use `TryFromName` that returns `false` when name is not found:

```csharp
if (TestEnum.TryFromName("One", out var myEnum))
{
    // use myEnum here
}
```

Both methods have a `ignoreCase` parameter (the default is case sensitive).

### FromValue()

Access an instance of an enum by matching its value:

```csharp
var myEnum = TestEnum.FromValue(1);
```

Exception `SmartEnumNotFoundException` is thrown when value is not found. Alternatively, you can use `TryFromValue` that returns `false` when value is not found:

```csharp
if (TestEnum.TryFromValue(1, out var myEnum))
{
    // use myEnum here
}
```

### ToString()

Display an enum using the `ToString()` override:

```csharp
Console.WriteLine(TestEnum.One); // One
```

### Switch

Given an instance of a TestEnum, switch depending on value:

```csharp
switch(testEnumVar.Name)
{
    case nameof(TestEnum.One):
        ...
        break;
    case nameof(TestEnum.Two):
        ...
        break;
    case nameof(TestEnum.Three):
        ...
        break;
    default:
        ...
        break;
}
```

Using pattern matching:

```csharp
switch(testEnumVar)
{
    case null:
        ...
        break;
    case var e when e.Equals(TestEnum.One):
        ...
        break;
    case var e when e.Equals(TestEnum.Two):
        ...
        break;
    case var e when e.Equals(TestEnum.Three):
        ...
        break;
    default:
        ...
        break;
}
```
Because of the limitations of pattern matching SmartEnum also provides a fluent interface to help create clean code:

```csharp
testEnumVar
    .When(TestEnum.One).Then(() => ... )
    .When(TestEnum.Two).Then(() => ... )
    .When(TestEnum.Three).Then(() => ... )
    .Default( ... );
```

N.B. For performance critical code the fluent interface carries some overhead that you may wish to avoid. See the available [benchmarks](src/SmartEnum.Benchmarks) code for your use case.

### Persisting with EF Core 2.1 or higher

EF Core 2.1 introduced [value conversions](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/ef/core/modeling/value-conversions) which can be used to map SmartEnum types to simple database types. For example, given an entity named `Policy` with a property `PolicyStatus` that is a SmartEnum, you could use the following code to persist just the value to the database:

```csharp
protected override void OnModelCreating(ModelBuilder builder)
{
    base.OnModelCreating(builder);

    builder.Entity<Policy>()
        .Property(p => p.PolicyStatus)
        .HasConversion(
            p => p.Value,
            p => PolicyStatus.FromValue(p));
}
```

## AutoFixture support

New instance of a `SmartEnum` should not be created. Instead, references to the existing ones should always be used. [AutoFixture](https://github.com/AutoFixture/AutoFixture) by default doesn't know how to do this. The `Ardalis.SmartEnum.AutoFixture` package includes a specimen builder for `SmartEnum`. Simply add the customization to the `IFixture` builder:

```csharp
var fixture = new Fixture()
    .Customize(new SmartEnumCustomization());

var smartEnum = fixture.Create<TestEnum>();
```

## Json<span></span>.NET support

When serializing a `SmartEnum` to JSON, only one of the properties (`Value` or `Name`) should be used. [Json.NET](https://www.newtonsoft.com/json) by default doesn't know how to do this. The `Ardalis.SmartEnum.JsonNet` package includes a couple of converters to achieve this. Simply use the attribute [JsonConverterAttribute](https://www.newtonsoft.com/json/help/html/T_Newtonsoft_Json_JsonConverter.htm) to assign one of the converters to the `SmartEnum` to be de/serialized:

```csharp
public class TestClass
{
    [JsonConverter(typeof(SmartEnumNameConverter<int>))]
    public TestEnum Property { get; set; }
}
```

uses the `Name`:

```json
{
  "Property": "One"
}
```

While this:

```csharp
public class TestClass
{
    [JsonConverter(typeof(SmartEnumValueConverter<int>))]
    public TestEnum Property { get; set; }
}
```

uses the `Value`:

```json
{
  "Property": 1
}
```

## References

- [Listing Strongly Typed Enums...)](https://ardalis.com/listing-strongly-typed-enum-options-in-c)
- [Enum Alternatives in C#](https://ardalis.com/enum-alternatives-in-c)
- [Smarter Enumerations (podcast episode)](http://www.weeklydevtips.com/014)
